Drug Label for drug brand COREGCR, containing carvedilol phosphate.These highlights do not include all the information needed to use COREG CR safely and effectively. See full prescribing information for COREG CR... COREG CR (carvedilol phosphate) Extended-release Capsules.. Initial U.S. Approval: 19957 DRUG INTERACTIONS- CYP P450 2D6 enzyme inhibitors may increase and rifampin may decrease carvedilol levels. (7.1, 7.5)- Hypotensive agents (e.g., reserpine, MAO inhibitors, clonidine) may increase the risk of hypotension and/or severe bradycardia. (7.2)- Cyclosporine or digoxin levels may increase. (7.3, 7.4)- Both digitalis glycosides and beta-blockers slow atrioventricular conduction and decrease heart rate. Concomitant use can increase the risk of bradycardia. (7.4)- Amiodarone may increase carvedilol levels resulting in further slowing of the heart rate or cardiac conduction. (7.6)- Verapamil- or diltiazem-type calcium channel blockers may affect ECG and/or blood pressure. (7.7)- Insulin and oral hypoglycemics action may be enhanced. (7.8)7.1 CYP2D6 Inhibitors and Poor MetabolizersInteractions of carvedilol with potent inhibitors of CYP2D6 isoenzyme (such as quinidine, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and propafenone) have not been studied, but these drugs would be expected to increase blood levels of the R(+) enantiomer of carvedilol see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3). Retrospective analysis of side effects in clinical trials showed that poor 2D6 metabolizers had a higher rate of dizziness during up-titration, presumably resulting from vasodilating effects of the higher concentrations of the alpha-blocking R(+) enantiomer.7.2 Hypotensive AgentsPatients taking both agents with beta-blocking properties and a drug that can deplete catecholamines (e.g., reserpine and monoamine oxidase inhibitors) should be observed closely for signs of hypotension and/or severe bradycardia.Concomitant administration of clonidine with agents with beta-blocking properties may potentiate blood-pressure- and heart-rate-lowering effects. When concomitant treatment with agents with beta-blocking properties and clonidine is to be terminated, the beta-blocking agent should be discontinued first. Clonidine therapy can then be discontinued several days later by gradually decreasing the dosage.7.3 CyclosporineModest increases in mean trough cyclosporine concentrations were observed following initiation of carvedilol treatment in 21 renal transplant patients suffering from chronic vascular rejection. In about 30% of patients, the dose of cyclosporine had to be reduced in order to maintain cyclosporine concentrations within the therapeutic range, while in the remainder no adjustment was needed. On the average for the group, the dose of cyclosporine was reduced about 20% in these patients. Due to wide interindividual variability in the dose adjustment required, it is recommended that cyclosporine concentrations be monitored closely after initiation of carvedilol therapy and that the dose of cyclosporine be adjusted as appropriate.7.4 Digitalis GlycosidesBoth digitalis glycosides and beta-blockers slow atrioventricular conduction and decrease heart rate. Concomitant use can increase the risk of bradycardia. Digoxin concentrations are increased by about 15% when digoxin and carvedilol are administered concomitantly. Therefore, increased monitoring of digoxin is recommended when initiating, adjusting, or discontinuing COREG CR see Clinical Pharmacology (12.5).7.5 Inducers/Inhibitors of Hepatic MetabolismRifampin reduced plasma concentrations of carvedilol by about 70% see Clinical Pharmacology (12.5). Cimetidine increased area under the curve (AUC) by about 30% but caused no change in Cmax see Clinical Pharmacology (12.5).7.6 AmiodaroneAmiodarone, and its metabolite desethyl amiodarone, inhibitors of CYP2C9 and P-glycoprotein, increased concentrations of the S(-) enantiomer of carvedilol by at least 2-fold see Clinical Pharmacology (12.5). The concomitant administration of amiodarone or other CYP2C9 inhibitors such as fluconazole with COREG CR may enhance the beta-blocking properties of carvedilol resulting in further slowing of the heart rate or cardiac conduction. Patients should be observed for signs of bradycardia or heart block, particularly when one agent is added to pre-existing treatment with the other.7.7 Calcium Channel BlockersConduction disturbance (rarely with hemodynamic compromise) has been observed when carvedilol is co-administered with diltiazem. As with other agents with beta-blocking properties, if COREG CR is to be administered orally with calcium channel blockers of the verapamil or diltiazem type, it is recommended that ECG and blood pressure be monitored.7.8 Insulin or Oral HypoglycemicsAgents with beta-blocking properties may enhance the blood-sugar-reducing effect of insulin and oral hypoglycemics. Therefore, in patients taking insulin or oral hypoglycemics, regular monitoring of blood glucose is recommended see Warnings and Precautions (5.6).7.9 Proton Pump InhibitorsThere is no clinically meaningful increase in AUC and Cmax with concomitant administration of carvedilol extended-release capsules with pantoprazole.7.10 AnesthesiaIf treatment with COREG CR is to be continued perioperatively, particular care should be taken when anesthetic agents which depress myocardial function, such as ether, cyclopropane, and trichloroethylene, are used see Overdosage (10).